---
layout: post
title:  "Unfold with unfoldr"
date:   2015-05-06 00:00:00
categories: [code, physics]
---
unfoldr is the second program of my complex systems software suite that I open-source. ([histogramr]({% post_url 2015-03-08-histogramr %}) was the first one.) For those of you who study the spectral features of complex systems such as random networks I think unfoldr will prove quite useful. Given the eigenvalues of an ensemble of random matrices, unfoldr calculates the nearest-neighbor level spacings of the unfolded spectrum, either as a whole or for *slices* of it. You can specify how you want to cut the spectrum into slices — linearly, logarithmically —, and unfoldr will calculate the level spacings for each slice individually. With this you can study how the level spacing statistics change with energy and whether or not there is a phase transition in the spectrum. I have used this technique to pinpoint the localization transition in the energy spectrum of an ultra-cold Rydberg gas, {% cite scholak2014spectral --file 2015-05-06-unfoldr %}. I comment on the purpose and the scientific value of nearest-neighbor level spacings statistics [below](#nearest-neighbor-level-spacing-statistics).

Like histogramr, unfoldr reads and writes [HDF5](http://www.hdfgroup.org/HDF5/) files. HDF5 files are organized in a hierarchical, file-system-like data structure. HDF5 is commonly used in scientific environments. It is designed to handle big scientific data sets. Please see my [earlier blog post]({% post_url 2015-03-08-histogramr %}) for a description of HDF5 and how it is used.


# Get unfoldr today from GitHub!

You can [download unfoldr from GitHub](https://github.com/tscholak/unfoldr). In Linux or Mac OS X, open a terminal session and run:

```
$ git clone git@github.com:tscholak/unfoldr.git
```

(get Git [here](http://git-scm.com)). Since I released unfoldr under the GPLv3, you can use it for *free*. unfoldr is written in Python and uses the [setuptools](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/setuptools). From within the source code directory, run:

```
python setup.py install
```

Make sure your Python's `bin` directory is in your `$PATH`. On Mac OS X, if you use Macports and haven't done so already, add

```
export PATH=/opt/local/Library/Frameworks/Python.framework/Versions/2.7/bin:$PATH
```

to your `~/.bash_login` or `~/.bash_profile` file. Once done, you can call unfoldr from the command line by invoking `unfoldr`. `unfoldr -h` will show you the command line arguments.


# What exactly is unfoldr good for?

To understand the use cases of unfoldr, I first have to review some complex system theory. If you know all that stuff, skip to [below](#nearest-neighbor-level-spacing-statistics).

Suppose you are dealing with a complex system, i.e. a large, complicated, but deterministic system or a system whose complexity comes from some intrinsic randomness. Suppose further that you do not seek a full and exact theory describing all phenomena that could possibly manifest in your complex system. Maybe you tried to derive such a theory, but you realized the impossibility of such a task. In fact, your resentment of the task has made you become ignorant of all the details of the system that were once so precious to you. Believe it or not, that is not at all a bad thing. There is a way out of your dilemma, and it involves to replace the Hamiltonian, the weighted adjacency matrix, Laplacian matrix, or whatever description of your system you have by a *random matrix* (or an ensemble of random matrices) that has the same invariances and symmetry properties as your system. As radical as it may sound, in most cases, it works surprisingly well. The theory that makes all this possible is called *random matrix theory* (RMT) {% cite Wigner:1967nu Dyson:1970mf Mehta:1991ph Guhr:1998fk Stockmann:1999gd --file 2015-05-06-unfoldr %}.


## Random matrix theory and Gaussian ensembles

RMT is concerned with the statistical properties (particularly, of eigenvalues and eigenvectors) of large $N \times N$ matrices $M$ with random elements $M\_{i j}$. Within RMT, all results are derived from the probability density function $f\_{M}$ of $M$. RMT is relevant in math {% cite Tao:2012kx --file 2015-05-06-unfoldr %}, theoretical physics (think complex nuclei, quantum and microwave billiards, metals with randomly distributed impurities, Rydberg gases, Boson sampling, ...), finance {% cite Bouchaud:2009uq --file 2015-05-06-unfoldr %}, and the study of networks and communities (social networks, computer networks, etc.). In physics, for instance, $M$ can be the matrix representation of a realization of the system's Hamiltonian.

Of course, for all interesting complex systems, the density $f\_{M}$ is highly nontrivial, impossible to obtain from first principles, and thus simply not known. The first step in an RMT treatment of a complex system is therefore to attempt to simplify or to guesstimate $f\_{M}$. As mentioned above, these attempts are guided by the invariance properties of the complex system. There are three seminal random matrix ensembles that result from such considerations: the Gaussian orthogonal ensemble (GOE), the Gaussian unitary ensemble (GUE) and the Gaussian symplectic ensemble (GSE). As the names suggest, the densities $f\_{M}$ of these ensembles respect the invariance with respect to orthogonal, unitary, or symplectic similarity transformations. In other words, the integral assumption of these ensembles is that all real (respectively, complex, quaternion) basis sets are equally well suited to describe the system. All matrix elements $M\_{i j}$ are independent and identically distributed, and the joint probability densities $f\_{M}$ separate into products of their marginals, $f\_{M} = f\_{M\_{1,1}} f\_{M\_{1,2}} \cdots f\_{M\_{N,N}}$. The marginals $f\_{M\_{i j}}$ are normally distributed with zero mean and fixed variance. For the GOE, they read

\\[
  \begin{align\*}
    f\_{M\_{i i}}(m) & = \frac{1}{\sqrt{2 \pi \sigma^2}} \, \mathrm{e}^{- \frac{m}{2 \sigma^2}}, \\\\
    f\_{M\_{i j}}(m) & = \frac{1}{\sqrt{\pi \sigma^2}} \, \mathrm{e}^{- \frac{m}{\sigma^2}},
  \end{align\*}
\\]

where $\sigma^2$ is the variance of the diagonal elements $M\_{i i}$. 

The three Gaussian random matrix ensembles have been studied at nauseam. The eigenvalue density is known (it's the Wigner semi-circle), the eigenstate localization properties are known (they are extended, i.e. every eigenvector extends over a fraction of the system that scales as the system size $N$), the level-spacing distribution is known (it's Wigner's surmise, see below), etc. The importance of the Gaussian ensembles stems from the fact that they are *universal*. If a closed system's behavior is chaotic in the classical limit, then, statistically speaking, it's corresponding wave or quantum behavior coincides with one of the Gaussian ensembles {% cite Mehta:1991ph --file 2015-05-06-unfoldr %}. Integrable (non-chaotic) systems, on the other hand, have a completely different statistical fingerprint. If your complex system turns out to coincide with universal Gaussian statistics, then you are done. There is nothing left to solver or discover, because everything you possibly would like to know about your system (and can be known) has already been discovered. And if your complex system turns out to be different, then there is still a good chance that it's statistics are described by one of the other important random matrix ensembles: the circular random matrices {% cite Guhr:1998fk Stockmann:1999gd --file 2015-05-06-unfoldr %}, the stable random matrices {% cite Cizeau:1994ml --file 2015-05-06-unfoldr %}, the Euclidean random matrices {% cite Goetschy:2013df --file 2015-05-06-unfoldr %}, the power-law banded random matrices {% cite Mirlin:1996aa --file 2015-05-06-unfoldr %}, the Laplacians of Erdős–Rényi (Poissonian) random graphs {% cite Bollobas:2001sf --file 2015-05-06-unfoldr %}, to name a few.


## Eigenvalue correlations

At this point, you may wonder: How can I find out about the statistics of my complex system? How do I get its statistical fingerprint? How can I compare my system with the random matrix ensembles?

One of the most useful statistical metrics for random matrix ensembles is the nearest-neighbor level spacing density (NNLS), $f\_{S}$, where $f\_{S} (s) \, \mathrm{d}s$ is the ensemble averaged probability to sample two adjacent eigenvalues $\Lambda\_{\nu}$, $\Lambda\_{\nu+1}$ that are separated by an energy $S$ between $s$ and $s + \mathrm{d}s$. I assume here that, for each realization, your eigenvalues $\Lambda\_{\nu}$ are sorted in ascending order, $\Lambda\_{1} \le \Lambda\_{2} \le \ldots \le \Lambda\_{N}$.

**unfoldr computes the level spacings for you. Afterwards, you can use histogramr to get the NNLS density.**

The NNLS density depends on the correlations between *all* eigenvalues of the random matrix. These correlations have a deterministic system-dependent part and a random universal part. Only the latter part may be used to compare the NNLS statistics with the universal random matrix ensembles. To extract the universal part, the spectrum of your complex system must be *unfolded*. Spectral unfolding is a commonly performed transformation that maps the ensemble averaged level spacing,

\\[
  \overline{S} = \int\_{0}^{\infty} s \, f\_{S} (s) \, \mathrm{d}s
\\]

to a constant, i.e. $\overline{S} = 1$. unfoldr will do that for you.


## Unfolding theory

Below I explain how unfolding works. As an auxiliary tool, I first define the cumulative spectral function which is sometimes also called the *staircase function*:

\\[
  \eta(\lambda) = \sum\_{\nu = 1}^N \Theta\left(\lambda - \Lambda\_{\nu}\right),
\\]

where $\Theta(\lambda) = \int\_\infty^\lambda \delta(\lambda') \, \mathrm{d}\lambda'$ is the Heaviside step function. The function $\eta(\lambda)$ counts the number of eigenvalues $\Lambda\_{\nu}$ with an energy smaller than or equal to $\lambda$. We separate $\eta(E)$ into a smooth part,

\\[
  \overline{\eta}(\lambda) = N F\_{\Lambda}(\lambda) = N \int\_{-\infty}^{\lambda} f\_{\Lambda}(\lambda') \, \mathrm{d}\lambda',
\\]

and a fluctuating part, $\eta(\lambda) - \overline{\eta}(\lambda)$, i.e. into the ensemble average given by the cumulative energy level distribution function $F\_{\Lambda}$ and the difference between the realization's value of $\eta(\lambda)$ and the ensemble average, respectively.

The unfolding procedure is defined as the mapping

\\[
  \Lambda\_{\nu} \mapsto \tilde{\Lambda}\_{\nu} = \overline{\eta}\left(\Lambda\_{\nu}\right)
\\]

executed for all eigenvalues $\{\Lambda\_{\nu}\}$ of a given realization. Thus, by construction, the ensemble averaged staircase function of the unfolded spectrum $\{\tilde{\Lambda}\_{\nu}\}$ evaluated for the scaled energy $\lambda$ is equal to $\lambda$ itself, and the corresponding unfolded mean level spacing equals one, such that the level spacing density $f_{S}$ of the unfolded eigenvalues is normalized with respect to

\\[
  \int\_0^\infty f\_{S}(s) \, \mathrm{d}s = 1, \\
  \int\_0^\infty s \, f\_{\mathrm{s}}(s) \, \mathrm{d}s = \overline{s} = 1.
\\]


# References

{% bibliography --file 2015-05-06-unfoldr --cited %}


